
Format for B.Eng and M.Eng Research
Projects and Dissertations in NAHPI
With additional notes from page 21
NB: This document complements, and does not
in any way contradicts or supercedes or
substitutes The University of Bamenda thesis
and dissertation guide



1. Introduction to this document
The University of Bamenda through the publication of its Thesis and Dissertation guide (UBa,
2018) offers among other uniform standards regarding formats of Dissertations and Theses and
allows flexibility to satisfy accepted practices in different domains in each Establishment. In
accordance with the above and to ensure adherence to technical matters in the preparation and
submission of Undergraduate Projects and Dissertations for degrees and certificates, this guide
shall serve for the preparation of Undergraduate Projects and Dissertations for degree programs
in the National Higher Polytechnic Institute (NAHPI) of The University of Bamenda.
2. Format of the End of Course B.Eng Project, MEng and MSc Dissertations
The entire main text (from Chapter 1 to Appendices) shall be 50 – 100 pages for B.Eng project
and 80 – 150 pages for M.Eng and M.Sc dissertations depending on the nature of the topic and
discipline. Otherwise, the School Scientific Committee (with external expert advice if necessary)
will decide on the length of the Dissertation.
The composition of a Dissertation format shall be:
2.1 Preliminary pages
The elements of this section shall follow the order, each beginning on a new page:
 Cover page (Soft binding before defence and Hard or cardboard binding after defence)
 Title page
 Copyright page (Candidates hold copyright to their Dissertations and Theses regardless
of whether they include a copyright page in them or register with the copyright office)
 Declaration (used before and after defence)
 Certification (used after defence)
 Acceptance page (required for postgraduate degrees) – this page confirms the
Committee’s approval and acceptance of the Dissertation or Thesis
 Abstract (separate page and no longer than one page, Keywords (maximum 6) at the
base)
 Résume (French translation of the Title on top followed by that of the Abstract)
 Dedication
 Acknowledgment
 Table of contents
 Lists of Tables
 Lists of Figures
 List of abbreviations
For the Cover and Title pages: A title of at most 15 words describing the Dissertation
shall be presented. The title must be succinct, grammatically perfect; different from a
textbook type title, and should not end in a full-stop since it is not a sentence.
Thus, instead of writing: “The Bamenda-Bambili Road in NW Cameroon”, which could be a
textbook or a review article title, consider writing “The conception and design of a doublecarriage road linking Bamenda and Bambili in NW Cameroon”
Thus, instead of writing: “Immuno-assay for breast cancer diagnosis”, consider writing “The
development and characterisation of a novel sandwich immuno-assay for breast cancer
diagnosis”
2.2 Specifications to be respected for Dissertations
2.2.1 Language: Dissertations in the National Higher Polytechnic Institute must be
written in English. The use of British English is compulsory (For example; use
colour instead of color).
2.2.2 Paper size: A4 Portrait. (NB: For the presentation of large Tables and Figures,
Landscape may be used for pages containing such Tables and Figures.)
Top margin: 2.5 cm
Bottom margin: 2.5 cm
Left margin: 3.5 cm
Right margin: 2.5 cm.
2.2.3 Formatting text:
Font type: Times New Roman
Font size: 12
Line spacing: 1.5
Alignment: Justified
2.2.4 Cover page colour: The colour for binding of ALL Dissertations in the National
Higher Polytechnic Institute shall be SKY BLUE.
2.2.5 Pagination: The page number shall be at the centre of the bottom of the page.

The preliminary part / aspect of the document shall be paginated in Roman numerals (i,
ii, iii, iv, v,…… ). The rest of the document starting from the CHAPTER 1:
INTRODUCTION page shall be paginated in Arabic numerals (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, ….) till the
end of the book. Each Chapter shall commence on a separate page.
2.3 Tables, Figures, Formulae and Numberings:
Table Captions shall be placed above Tables at the left side. Figure captions shall be
placed below Figures at the left side.
- Every Chapter, Table, Figure and equation shall be numbered in Arabic numerals and
chronologically using chapter numbers, e.g. Table 3.1 for Table 1 under Chapter 3.
Figure 2.4 standing for Figure 4 under Chapter 2. In the main text, the names of figures
and tables must begin with capital letters, i.e. Figure… Table… e.g. “It can be been in
Figure 3.2 that…..” “ Looking at Table 3.7…..”
- Photographs and maps must be of high quality.
- If a Table or Figure continues onto a subsequent page(s), include the following caption:
Table xxx (continued) or Figure xxxxx (continued).
2.4 Numbering of headings and subheadings
Heading: 1,
First subheading: 1.1
Second Subheading: 1.1.1
The numbering of the chapters and sub-headings shall be according to levels as follows:
E.g. Chapter 1: INTRODCUTION
1.1
1.1.1
1.1.2
1.2
1.2.1
1.2.2
etc.
NB: The use of A, B or a, b, or 1a, 1b, to label headings or subheadings is
specifically prohibited.

2.5 Headers or footers Students should not put any information as headers or footers
2.6 Binding: Use spiral binding, protected by a sheet of transparent paper before the defence
and after the defence use wet binding.
3 Main Body of the Dissertation
Chapter 1: Introduction
Chapter 2: Literature Review
Chapter 3: Materials and Methods
Chapter 4: Results and Discussion
4.1. Results
4.2. Discussion
Chapter 5: Conclusions and Recommendations
5.1. Conclusions
5.2. Recommendations
References (does not carry a chapter number): See detailed treatment of this below.
Appendices (does not carry a chapter number): This section shall appear at the end of the main
body of the Dissertation (after the References). In the Appendix section, the appendices shall be
announced in the same chronological order as they are made referenced to in the text or previous
parts. It shall contain supplementary materials that are not essential parts of the text but which
may be helpful in providing a more comprehensive understanding of the Dissertation. It may
also be information that is cumbersome to be included in the main body of the Dissertation.
Each Appendix shall start on a new page and shall be numbered.
4. DETAILS OF SOME ELEMENTS IN THE STRUCTURE OF DISSERTATION
4.1 Dedication
This section contains person or group of persons in whose honour the dissertation is written. It is
optional.
4.2 Acknowledgments
Always starts with your supervisors
Then anyone who helped you:
1. Technically (including materials, supplies)
2. Intellectually (assistance, advice)
3. Financially (for example, Departmental support, travel grants)

The first person to be acknowledged must be your supervisor, then the co-supervisor, if any.
Never forget to acknowledge the laboratory where you worked, as well as your HOD and
lecturers.
4.3 Abstract
 Length should be one (1) paragraph of maximum 300 words for B.Eng projects, M.Eng
and MSc Dissertations.
 The abstract must contain elements of: the problem statement; the aim or overall
objective of the study or purpose statement; the methodology; the key results
obtained; the major conclusion from the results.
 State three (3) to five (5) keywords.
Table of Contents
 list all headings and subheadings with page numbers
 indent subheadings
List of Figures
List page numbers of all figures. The list should include a short title for each figure but not the
description of whole caption.
List of Tables
List page numbers of all tables. The list should include a short title for each table but not the
description of whole caption.
Chapter 1: Introduction
It should contain the following:
1.1 Background and statement of the problem (should normally not exceed two pages
for a B.Eng or a Master’s dissertation)
(Here, the project is introduced. Begin your introduction with broad statements
that seek to situate the project idea within the broader area of science and
technology. Then narrow down to a narration of what is known and what is not
known (gaps in knowledge). The introduction section ends with a statement of
the problem and what you plan to do to solve it (in the case of a project proposal)
or have done to solve it (in the case of a project report).
A good introduction cannot be completed until the body of the dissertation (or
proposal) is known. Consider completing the introductory section(s) after you
have completed the rest of the project/dissertation (or proposal), rather than
before.
1.2 Rationale (why you are carrying out the work)
1.3 Research questions or Research hypotheses (chose one only)
1.3.1 Main research question (corresponding to the overall objective)
1.3.2 Specific research questions or research hypotheses (corresponding
to the specific objectives in nature and number) (chose one)
1.4 Objectives
1.4.1 Overall objective (singular tense)
1.4.2 Specific objectives (more than 1 but generally a maximum of four
and numbered 1, 2, …4)
The overall objective must tie with the title of the project. The specific objectives are sub-actions
you will undertake to address the major action mentioned in the overall of general objective.
Action verbs should be used. For a proposal, use the future tense; For a report, use the past
tense.
E.g.
In a Proposal: The overall objective of the present project is to……
In a Report: The overall objective of the present project was to……
In a Proposal: The specific objectives are to….
In a Project: The specific objectives were……
Literature review
Here, all the books, articles, dissertations, and every other written and published material related
to the research topic are presented bringing out the findings, contributions and limitations of
each. These findings are used to situate and bring out the relevance of the present work in the
project/dissertation. This section seeks to review current knowledge in the area of study and
identify gaps in knowledge, leading finally to the proposal on how the gaps could be filled.
Materials and Methods section
(subdivided into sections corresponding to the specific objectives)
What belongs in the "research methods" section of a project/dissertation?
1. Description of your theory, materials, procedure, analytical methods, including
reference to any specialized statistical software.
2. Calculations, technique and calibration plots.
3. Limitations, assumptions, and range of validity.
4. Information needed by another researcher to replicate or reproduce your
experiment/results.
5. Information to allow the reader to assess the validity of your research results.
Citations in this section should be limited to data sources and references of where to find more
complete descriptions of procedures. Do not include descriptions of results here.
Results
(subdivided into sections corresponding to the specific objectives)
 The results are actual statements of observations, including statistics, tables and graphs.
 Indicate information on range of variation.
 Mention negative results as well as positive. Do not interpret results - save that for the
discussion.
 Lay out the case as for a jury. Present sufficient details so that others can draw their
own inferences and construct their own explanations.
 Use S.I. units (m, s, kg, W, etc.) throughout the thesis.
 Break up your results into logical segments by using subheadings
 Key results should be stated in clear sentences at the beginning of paragraphs. It is far
better to say "X had significant positive relationship with Y (linear regression p<0.01,
r^2=0.79)" then to start with a less informative like "There is a significant relationship
between X and Y". Describe the nature of the findings; do not just tell the reader
whether or not they are significant.
Quarantine your observations from your interpretations. The writer must make it crystal clear to
the reader which statements are observation and which are interpretations. In most
circumstances, this is best accomplished by physically separating statements about new
observations from statements about the meaning or significance of those observations.
Alternatively, this goal can be accomplished by careful use of phrases such as "I infer ...". For
example, vast bodies of geological literature became obsolete with the advent of plate tectonics;
the papers that survived are those in which observations were presented in stand-alone fashion,
unmuddied by whatever ideas the author might have had about the processes that caused the
observed phenomena.
How do you do this?
1. Physical separation into different sections or paragraphs.
2. Don't overlay interpretation on top of data in figures.
3. Careful use of phrases such as "We infer that ".
4. Don't worry if "results" seem short.
Why?
1. Easier for your reader to absorb, frequent shifts of mental mode not required.
2. Ensures that your work will endure in spite of shifting paradigms.
Discussion
Under this section, the student should essentially recall the problem statement, objectives, then
in different paragraphs should recall a key result, interpret it, seek to justify it and relate it with
previous findings in the literature. The discussion section should be a brief essay in itself,
answering the following questions and caveats:
1. What are the major patterns in the observations? (Refer to spatial and temporal
variations.)
2. What are the relationships, trends and generalizations among the results?
3. What are the exceptions to these patterns or generalizations?
4. What are the likely causes (mechanisms) underlying these patterns resulting
predictions?
5. Is there agreement or disagreement with previous work?
6. Interpret results in terms of background laid out in the introduction - what is the
relationship of the present results to the original question?
7. What is the implication of the present results for other unanswered questions in earth
sciences, ecology, environmental policy, etc....?
8. Multiple hypotheses: There are usually several possible explanations for results. Be
careful to consider all of these rather than simply pushing your favorite one. If you can
eliminate all but one, that is great, but often that is not possible with the data in hand. In
that case you should give even treatment to the remaining possibilities, and try to
indicate ways in which future work may lead to their discrimination.
9. Avoid bandwagons: A special case of the above. Avoid jumping a currently fashionable
point of view unless your results really do strongly support them.
10. What are the things we now know or understand that we didn't know or understand
before the present work?
11. Include the evidence or line of reasoning supporting each interpretation.
12. What is the significance of the present results: why should we care?
This section should be rich in references to similar work and background needed to interpret
results. Is there material that does not contribute to one of the elements listed above? Break up
the section into logical segments by using subheads. Include elements of limitations of your
study, if any.
Conclusions
(subdivided into sections corresponding to the specific objectives; followed by a general
conclusion section)
 What is the strongest and most important statement that you can make from your
observations?
 If you met the reader at a meeting six months from now, what do you want them to
remember about your project/dissertation?
 Refer back to problem posed, and describe the conclusions that you reached from
carrying out this investigation, summarize new observations, new interpretations, and
new insights that have resulted from the present work.
 Include the broader implications of your results.
Recommendations
List the recommendations for improvement of the research you have done. Reflect on your
results in isolation and in relation to what others have achieved in the same field. This selfanalysis is particularly important.
References
The APA (American Psychological Association) Style shall be the referencing style used in
all projects and dissertations in the National Higher Polytechnic Institute.
 cite all ideas, concepts, text, data that are not your own
 if you write a major statement, back it up with your own data or a reference
 all references cited in the main text must be listed in the References section. Also, only
references cited in the main can be put in the References section.
 The APA style uses three kinds of information to be included in in-text citations. The
author's last name and date (year) of publication must always appear, and these
items must match exactly the corresponding entry in the references list. Eg …… (ChoNgwa, 2003); ……... Cho-Ngwa et al. (2018); …......( Cho-Ngwa and Nfah, 1995).
 cite single-author references by the surname of the author (followed by date of the
publication in parenthesis)
o ... according to Mofor (2017)…….
o ... population growth is one of the greatest environmental concerns facing future
generations (Hays, 1994).
 cite double-author references by the surnames of both authors (followed by date of the
publication in parenthesis)
o e.g. Fombu and Mofor (2020)…….
 cite more than double-author references by the surname of the first author followed by
et al. and then the date of the publication
o e.g. a paper published by Fidelis Cho-Ngwa, Eustace Nfah and Kennedy Fozao
would be: Cho-Ngwa et al. (2020)……..
o If it is cited at the end of a statement, e.g. Other workers approached the
problem through production and use of specific monoclonal antibodies (Bartlett
et al., 1975; Cabrera et al., 1989).
 do not use footnotes
 Publications by the same author(s) in the same year shall be marked such as 2019a,
2019b, 2020a, 2020b, etc.
 In the reference list, journal articles are cited in the following order: Author(s) names,
(Year of publication), name of journal in Italics, volume (number): page range. For
example; Mbuh, M. K., Ngapgue, F., Kagou, D.A, Mofor, N. A., and Penka, J.B.
(2020b). Modelling the thermomechanical behaviour of earth bricks stabilized with
Portland cement. International Journal of Advanced Research in Science, Engineering
and Technology, 7(10):15290-15301.
 In the reference list, published books are cited in the following order: Author(s) names,
(Year of publication), titles of book in Italics, Edition, ISBN, Publisher, Country or
Town of publication, Number of pages. For example; Benton, J.J.J. (2003). Agronomic
Handbook- Management of Crops, Soils, and Their Fertility. 3
rd Edtion, ISBN:0-8493-
0897-6, CRC Press LLC., USA, Pp. 1035.
 For information obtained from the internet, follow the same procedure for books and
add the search engine, date and time you accessed the document. For example; Waite,
W.M. (1997). Assessment of water supply and associated matters in relation to the
incidence of cryptosporidiosis, Drinking water inspectorate,
http://www.doctoc.com/docs/8659019/thesis.htlm. Retrieved 15 May, 2014.
 The candidate shall ensure that the spelling of names and years are the same in the
document and the list of references
 List all references cited in the text in alphabetical order using the following format for
different types of material:
Benton, J.J.J. (2003). Agronomic Handbook- Management of Crops, Soils, and Their Fertility.
ISBN:0-8493-0897-6, CRC Press LLC., USA, Pp. 1035.
Mbuh, M. K., Kagou, D., Ngapgue, F., Mofor, N. A., Manefouet, B. E. and Yamb , E. (2020a).
Compressed Stabilized Earth Brick (CSEB) As Building Construction Elements. IOSR
Journal of Mechanical and Civil Engineering, 17 (4):42-48.
Mbuh, M. K., Ngapgue, F., Kagou, D.A, Mofor, N. A., and Penka, J.B. (2020b). Modelling the
thermomechanical behaviour of earth bricks stabilized with Portland cement.
International Journal of Advanced Research in Science, Engineering and Technology,
7(10):15290-15301.
Mofor, N. A., Njoyim, E.B.T., Mbene, K., Yuhinwenkeh, N. B., and Nchofua, F. B. (2020).
Page 12 of 37
Trace Element Status and Environmental Implications of Soils and Zea mays from
Farmed Dumpsites in the Bamenda Metropolis, North-West Cameroon. Hindawi
Applied and Environmental Soil Science, 2020:1-9.
Ngane, E.B., Tening, A.S., Ehabe, E.E. and Tchuenteu (2012). Potentials of some cement by
products for liming of an acid soil in the humid zone of South-Western Cameroon.
Agriculture and Biology Journal of North America, 3(8): 326-331.
Njoyim, E.B.T., Mvondo-Zé, A.D., Mofor, N.A. and Onana, A.A. (2016). Phosphorus
adsorption isotherms in relation to soil characteristics of some selected volcanic affected
soils of Foumbot in the West Region of Cameroon. International Journal of Soil Science,
11: 19-28.
Tellen, V.A. and Yerima, B.P.K. (2018). Efects of land use change on soil physicochemical
properties in selected areas in the North West region of Cameroon. Environmental
Systems Research, 7:1-29.
Waite, W.M. (1997). Assessment of water supply and associated matters in relation to the
incidence of cryptosporidiosis, Drinking water inspectorate,
http://www.doctoc.com/docs/8659019/thesis.htlm. Retrieved 15 May, 2014 at 5:00 pm.

SOME IMPORTANT ISSUES
1 Plagiarism and Falsification of Data: NAHPI expects students to follow the code of
academic integrity of the University of Bamenda. They have the obligation to exhibit
honesty and to respect the ethical standards of the academy as they carry out their academic
assignments and must avoid plagiarism. Projects and Dissertations shall be checked for
Plagiarism and violating students will be disciplined accordingly. Falsification of data shall
be treated as a case of examination fraud.
2 Ethical issues and presentation style of Projects and Dissertations: A supervisor shall not
write for a candidate nor shall the supervisor override the candidate’s style by over-editing
and prompting. The candidate shall ensure that the results are carefully recorded and
calculations verified.
3 Projects and Dissertations are being classified as publications. Candidates hold copyright
to their Dissertations and Theses regardless of whether they include a copyright page in them
or register with the copyright office. Candidates will sign the UBa Library Projects and
Dissertations consent form to protect their rights as authors of the research reports. However,
candidates who do not wish that their works should be available for reasons such as pending
patents, copyright agreements or future publication should seek advice from the
Postgraduate School as to the restricted use or embargo.
4 Other Provisions: All postgraduate students shall consult the “Thesis and Dissertation
Guide of The University of Bamenda” (UBa, 2018) for guidelines not defined in this
document and keep track of modifications and amendments of the University of Bamenda
Senate, through the administration of the National Higher Polytechnic Institute.


ADDITIONAL NOTES
2.3 Details of the elements
2.3.1 Project Title
Project Title is a name of the Project. A proper project title describes the whole assignment in one
sentence. Therefore:
- it must be succinctly written,
- catchy and generate interest to a passers-by,
- contains no jargon or unfamiliar abbreviations,
- should be 5-15 words (usually never more than 20 words);
- excellent grammar
2.3.2 Abstract
 A good abstract
- begins with a statement of the problem that explains in 1-3 sentences the problem the
project is being conducted to resolve. For a research proposal, this segment could be much
longer.
- It then goes on to state the purpose, goal or overall objective of the project.
- It moves on with elements of the project design, methodology, results obtained (or expected
results in the case of a proposal); and the major conclusion (in the case of a dissertation or
work already done).
- is concise, succinct, readable, excellent grammar, quantitative and contains all the
keywords.
 Answers to these questions should be found in the abstract:
1. Why did you do it? What question were you trying to answer?
2. How did you do it? State methods.
3. What did you learn? State major results.
4. Why does it matter? Make a conclusion statement that captures the major results.
 Abstracts do not have citations.
An examples of a good abstracts with the different colours showcasing the various components:
Title: Genetic Relationship Between the Different Ethno-Linguistic Groups of Mezam and Momo
Divisions of the North West Region of Cameroon

Abstract:
Onchocerciasis is a neglected tropical disease that currently afflicts an estimated 15 million people and is the
second leading infectious cause of blindness world-wide. The development of a macrofilaricide to cure the
disease has been hindered by the lack of appropriate small laboratory animal models. This study therefore,
was aimed at developing and validating the Mongolian gerbil, as an Onchocerca adult male worm model. The
gerbils were each implanted with 20 O. ochengi male worms (collected from infected cattle), in the
peritoneum. Following drug or placebo treatments, the implanted worms were recovered from the animals
and analyzed for burden, motility and viability. Worm recovery in control gerbils was on average 35%, with
89% of the worms being 100% motile. Treatment of the gerbils implanted with male worms with flubendazole
(FBZ) resulted in a significant reduction (p = 0.0021) in worm burden (6.0% versus 27.8% in the control
animals); all recovered worms from the treated group had 0% worm motility versus 91.1% motility in control
animals. FBZ treatment had similar results even after four different experiments. Using this model, we tested a
related drug, oxfendazole (OFZ), and found it to also significantly (p = 0.0097) affect worm motility (22.7%
versus 95.0% in the control group). We conclude that we have successfully developed and validated a novel
gerbil O. ochengi adult male worm model for testing new macrofilaricidal drugs in vivo.
Keywords: Onchocerciasis, animal model, drug screens
Title:
Abstract:
Ultralight bosons such as axion-like particles are viable candidates for dark matter. They can form
stable, macroscopic field configurations in the form of topological defects that could concentrate the
dark matter density into many distinct, compact spatial regions that are small compared with the
Galaxy but much larger than the Earth. Here we report the results of the search for transient signals
from the domain walls of axion-like particles by using the global network of optical magnetometers
for exotic (GNOME) physics searches. We search the data, consisting of correlated measurements
from optical atomic magnetometers located in laboratories all over the world, for patterns of signals
propagating through the network consistent with domain walls. The analysis of these data from a
continuous month-long operation of GNOME finds no statistically significant signals, thus placing
experimental constraints on such dark matter scenarios.
Keywords:
2.3.3 Introduction
This section introduces the readers to the problem the project is trying to solve or the questions that
are to be answered. In arranges the statements in a funnel-shape structure, from general and
broader statements to more and more focused statements, ending up in the purpose of the project
in the early paragraph.

A good introduction can't be completed until the body of the thesis (or of the project proposal) is
known. Consider completing the introductory section(s) after you have completed the rest of the
project/dissertation (or project proposal), rather than before. The Introduction finally ends with a
statement recapitulating the main research question, followed by the solution being set forward (in
the case of proposal) or that has been set forward (in the case of a thesis) to address it.
An example of a good introduction follows:
MARIDA: A benchmark for Marine Debris detection from Sentinel-2 remote sensing data
Introduction
Marine Debris, such as plastics, is a major global issue with important environmental, economic, human health
and aesthetic aspects. Plastics remain in the ocean for a long time, and have been found in various areas
worldwide [1–3], affecting marine life at different trophic levels [4]. To tackle the Marine Debris issue, several
solutions for detecting [5, 6], cleaning [7] and preventing [8] have been developed and validated. Among
those, detecting and monitoring floating litter has recently gained the attention of most research and
development efforts [9].
In particular, earth observation data from public and commercial satellite programs [10–14] have been
employed for detecting and monitoring Marine Debris, as well as remote sensing data from manned aircraft
[15], unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) [16–20], bridge-mounted [21] and underwater-cameras [22]. Spectral
indices have also been proposed to enhance the detection of Marine Debris on multispectral satellite data, like
the Floating Debris Index (FDI) [13] and the Plastic Index (PI) [23] that have been developed based on artificial
plastic targets.
Furthermore, to better understand the spectral behaviour of Marine Debris, hyperspectral measurements
have been conducted, exploring sensors’ capabilities in distinguishing plastics from other features such as
vegetation, natural material, and water types [24–28]. Investigating Marine Debris characteristics (including its
spectral behavior) has been also attempted via multispectral satellite observations [10, 12, 13, 29], highlighting
that spectral discrimination of Marine Debris from other sea surface features (e.g., ships, foam) is not
straightforward. Indeed, differentiating floating plastic debris from bright features, such as waves, sunglint,
clouds, is currently considered very challenging [5, 6]. This is due to the fact that plastics have complex
properties, diversifying in color, chemical composition, size and level of water submersion [30, 31]. A highquality dataset can address the challenges mentioned above, supporting also the development and
improvement of Marine Debris detection methods, and assessing the operational aspects of any given solution
(e.g., scalability).
However, despite the challenging and continuously growing issue of Marine Debris, the currently available
datasets are relatively limited in number and do not usually employ open-access high-resolution satellite data
over geographically extended areas. These facts prohibit satellite data exploitation from ML frameworks and
operational solutions. In addition, most of the currently available marine remote sensing datasets focus on
detecting specific objects such as vessels [32–35]. Datasets for cloud detection over the ocean [36]
and Sargassum macroalgae extraction [37, 38] have also been developed with a limited number of classes.
To this end, this study aims to fill this gap with a new, open-access benchmark dataset, named MARIDA—
MARIne Debris Archive, based on S2 multispectral satellite data. MARIDA offers real cases with Marine Debris
events, providing globally distributed annotations, ready for ML tasks. The produced dataset takes an
innovative step forward by containing sea features that co-exist in remote sensing images, ultimately forming
15 thematic classes in total. Along with MARIDA, ML baselines for the weakly supervised semantic

segmentation task [39] are presented, including shallow ML and deep neural network architectures. To enlarge
the benchmark application area, the multi-label classification task is also considered.
2.3.4 Literature review
A literature review is a survey of scholarly sources on a specific topic. It provides an overview of
current knowledge, allowing you to identify relevant theories, methods, and gaps in the existing
research.
Writing a literature review involves finding relevant publications (such as books and journal articles),
critically analyzing them, and explaining what you found. There are five key steps:
1. Search for relevant literature
2. Evaluate sources
3. Identify themes, debates and gaps
4. Outline the structure
5. Write your literature review
A good literature review doesn’t just summarize sources—it analyzes, synthesizes, and critically
evaluates to give a clear picture of the state of knowledge on the subject.
In writing the literature review:
- Be chronological
- Start by reviewing the problem and scope and defining the key terms
- Ensure all important concepts or topics around the project have been reviewed in separate
headings or subheadings
- Avoid plagiarism or any extensive copying without giving credits to the source
- Avoid citing publications you have not read
This section seeks to review current knowledge in the area of study and identify gaps in knowledge,
leading finally to the proposal on how the gaps could be filled.
2.3.5 Problem Statement / Project rationale
A research problem is an area of concern or a gap in the existing knowledge that points to the need
for further understanding and investigation. A problem statement is used in research work as a claim
that outlines the problem addressed by a study. The problem statement briefly explains the problem
that the research will address. If the topic of your research is food safety in the school feeding
system, you need to first identify why food safety is lacking in schools. Your problem statement can
explain that food safety in school feeding systems is an important concern and point towards a gap
in research that shows that this problem has not been addressed. Adapted from:
https://www.editage.com/insights/how-to-write-a-problem-statement-for-my-research Retrieved
January 08, 2022

The rationale of your research is the reason for conducting the study. The rationale should answer
the need for conducting the said research. It is a very important part of your write-up as it justifies
the significance and novelty of the study. That is why it is also referred to as the justification
of the study.
To write your rationale, you should first write a background on what all research has been done on
your study topic. Follow this with ‘what is missing’ or ‘what are the open questions of the study’.
Identify the gaps in the literature and emphasize why it is important to address those gaps. This will
form the rationale of your study. The rationale should be followed by a hypothesis and objectives.
The rationale of a thesis is usually written on about half to a full A4 page.
From the forgoing, it is clear that both the Problem Statement (or Statement of the Problem) and
the Rationale are addressing the same question of: Why does this research need to be conducted?
For conference presentations, the statement of the problem is generally incorporated into the
introduction; academic proposals for theses or dissertations should have this as a separate section.
Adapted from https://www.fundsforngos.org/how-to-write-a-proposal/writing-problemstatementproject-rationale-in-a-proposal/ Retrieved January 08, 2022
2.3.6 Research questions or research hypotheses
Research Questions are relevant to normative or census type research (How many of them are
there? Is there a relationship between them?). They are most often used in qualitative
inquiry. Hypotheses are relevant to theoretical research and are typically used only in quantitative
inquiry.
A research question poses a relationship between two or more variables but phrases the relationship
as a question; a hypothesis represents a declarative statement of the relations between two or more
variables
Deciding whether to use questions or hypotheses depends on factors such as the purpose of the
study, the nature of the design and methodology, and the audience of the research (at times even
the taste and preference of committee members, particularly the Chair).
Hypotheses can be null or alternate
Example of null— “There is no difference in school achievement for high and low self-regulated
students.”
Example of alternative— “High self-regulated students will achieve more in their classes than low
self-regulated students.”
In general, the null hypothesis is used if theory/literature does not suggest a hypothesized
relationship between the variables under investigation; the alternative is generally reserved for
situations in which theory/research suggests a relationship or directional interplay.
2.3.7 Overall and specific objectives
2.3.7.1 Overall objective (also called aim or overall goal):
- Usually starts like this: The overall objective of the present study is to (or was to)……
(in the case where the work has already been done, use the past tense)
- State clearly and succinctly the overall objective of the study
- This must reflect and recapitulate the keywords of the project title – use the project
title to formulate the overall objective.
- This must be in singular tense
2.3.7.2 Specific objectives (also called objectives):
- Usually starts like this: The specific objectives were:……
1…..
2…..
etc
- Number the specific objectives (1, 2, 3…)
- They should be at least two, but should generally not be more than 4, unless
exceptionally
- The rest of the chapters must then be arranged into sections following the specific
objectives. Thus, if there are 3 specific objectives, the Materials and Methods or
Methodology section would be arranged in 3 main sections, and the results also in 3
main sections corresponding to the 3 specific objectives.
2.3.7.3 Example of overall and specific objectives:
Objectives
Overall objective
The overall objective of this study was to determine the genetic relationship between the
different ethno-linguistic groups of Mezam and Momo Divisions of the North West Region
of Cameroon
Specific objectives
The specific objectives were:
1. To determine the allele frequency distribution of each allele in this study;
2. To determine the number of haplotypes in these populations;
3. To establish the genetic relationship between the different linguistic groups;
4. To establish any correlation between linguistic relatedness and genetic relatedness
among these populations
2.3.8 Significance of study
Indicate how your research will refine, revise, or extend existing knowledge in the area under
investigation. Note that such refinements, revisions, or extensions may have either substantive,
theoretical, or methodological significance. Think pragmatically (i.e., cash value).
Most studies have two potential audiences: practitioners and professional peers. Statements
relating the research to both groups are in order.
This can be a difficult section to write. Think about implications—how results of the study may affect
scholarly research, theory, practice, educational interventions, curricula, counseling, policy.
When thinking about the significance of your study, ask yourself the following questions.
1. What will results mean to the theoretical framework that framed the study?
2. What suggestions for subsequent research arise from the findings?
3. What will the results mean to the practicing educator?
4. Will results influence programs, methods, and/or interventions?
5. Will results contribute to the solution of educational problems?
6. Will results influence educational policy decisions?
7. What will be improved or changed as a result of the proposed research?
8. How will results of the study be implemented, and what innovations will come about?

2.3.9 Limitations and Delimitations of study
A limitation identifies potential weaknesses of the study. Think about your analysis, the nature of
self-report, your instruments, the sample. Think about threats to internal validity that may have
been impossible to avoid or minimize—explain.
A delimitation addresses how a study will be narrowed in scope, that is, how it is bounded. This is
the place to explain the things that you are not doing and why you have chosen not to do them—the
literature you will not review (and why not), the population you are not studying (and why not), the
methodological procedures you will not use (and why you will not use them). Limit your
delimitations to the things that a reader might reasonably expect you to do but that you, for clearly
explained reasons, have decided not to do.
2.3.10 Project Design and Methodology, Materials and Methods
(see Chapter 1 for details)
Methodology is usually used in the research proposal, while Materials and Methods, which are the
details of the Methodology, are mostly used in reporting the research.
2.3.11 Expected outcomes (in proposals only)
In your proposal write-up, give a structured narration of the expected outcomes of your study in the
place of results, since you don’t have results yet.
2.3.12 Results
The results section of the research paper is where you report the findings of your study based upon
the information gathered as a result of the methodology [or methodologies] you applied. The results
section should simply state the findings, without bias or interpretation, and arranged in a logical
sequence. The results section should always be written in the past tense. A section describing results
[a.k.a., "findings"] is particularly necessary if your paper includes data generated from your own
research.
Importance of a Good Results Section
When formulating the results section, it's important to remember that the results of a study do
not prove anything. Research results can only confirm or reject the research problem underpinning
your study. However, the act of articulating the results helps you to understand the problem from
within, to break it into pieces, and to view the research problem from various perspectives.

The page length of this section is set by the amount and types of data to be reported. Be concise,
using non-textual elements, such as figures and tables, if appropriate, to present results more
effectively. In deciding what data to describe in your results section, you must clearly distinguish
material that would normally be included in a research paper from any raw data or other material
that could be included as an appendix. In general, raw data should not be included in the main text
of your paper unless requested to do so by your professor.
Avoid providing data that is not critical to answering the research question. The background
information you described in the introduction section should provide the reader with any additional
context or explanation needed to understand the results. A good rule is to always re-read the
background section of your paper after you have written up your results to ensure that the reader
has enough context to understand the results [and, later, how you interpreted the results in the
discussion section of your paper].
Structure and Writing Style
I. Structure and Approach
For most research paper formats, there are two ways of presenting and organizing the results.
1. Present the results followed by a short explanation of the findings. For example, you may
have noticed an unusual correlation between two variables during the analysis of your
findings. It is correct to point this out in the results section. However, speculating as to why
this correlation exists, and offering a hypothesis about what may be happening, belongs in
the discussion section of your paper.
2. Present a section and then discuss it, before presenting the next section then discussing it,
and so on. This is more common in longer papers because it helps the reader to better
understand each finding. In this model, it can be helpful to provide a brief conclusion in the
results section that ties each of the findings together and links to the discussion.
NOTE: The discussion section should generally follow the same format chosen in presenting and
organizing the results.
II. Content
In general, the content of your results section should include the following elements:
1. An introductory context for understanding the results by restating the research problem that
underpins the purpose of your study.
2. A summary of your key findings arranged in a logical sequence that generally follows your
methodology section.
3. Inclusion of non-textual elements, such as, figures, charts, photos, maps, tables, etc. to
further illustrate the findings, if appropriate.
4. In the text, a systematic description of your results, highlighting for the reader observations
that are most relevant to the topic under investigation [remember that not all results that
emerge from the methodology that you used to gather the data may be relevant].
5. Use of the past tense when refering to your results.

6. The page length of your results section is guided by the amount and types of data to be
reported. However, focus only on findings that are important and related to addressing the
research problem.
Using Non-textual Elements
 Either place figures, tables, charts, etc. within the text of the result, or include them in the
back of the report--do one or the other but never do both.
 In the text, refer to each non-textual element in numbered order [e.g., Table 1, Table 2;
Chart 1, Chart 2; Map 1, Map 2].
 If you place non-textual elements at the end of the report, make sure they are clearly
distinguished from any attached appendix materials, such as raw data.
 Regardless of placement, each non-textual element must be numbered consecutively and
complete with caption [caption goes under the figure, table, chart, etc.]
 Each non-textual element must be titled, numbered consecutively, and complete with a
heading [title with description goes above the figure, table, chart, etc.].
 In proofreading your results section, be sure that each non-textual element is sufficiently
complete so that it could stand on its own, separate from the text.
III. Problems to Avoid
When writing the results section, avoid doing the following:
1. Discussing or interpreting your results. Save all this for the next section of your paper,
although where appropriate, you should compare or contrast specific results to those found
in other studies [e.g., "Similar to Smith [1990], one of the findings of this study is the strong
correlation between motivation and academic achievement...."].
2. Reporting background information or attempting to explain your findings; this should have
been done in your Introduction section, but don't panic! Often the results of a study point to
the need to provide additional background information or to explain the topic further, so
don't think you did something wrong. Revise your introduction as needed.
3. Ignoring negative results. If some of your results fail to support your hypothesis, do not
ignore them. Document them, then state in your discussion section why you believe a
negative result emerged from your study. Note that negative results, and how you handle
them, often provides you with the opportunity to write a more engaging discussion section,
therefore, don't be afraid to highlight them.
4. Including raw data or intermediate calculations. Ask your professor if you need to include
any raw data generated by your study, such as transcripts from interviews or data files. If
raw data is to be included, place it in an appendix or set of appendices that are referred to in
the text.
5. Be as factual and concise as possible in reporting your findings. Do not use phrases that are
vague or non-specific, such as, "appeared to be greater or lesser than..." or "demonstrates
promising trends that...."
6. Presenting the same data or repeating the same information more than once. If you feel
the need to highlight something, you will have a chance to do that in the discussion section.
7. Confusing figures with tables. Be sure to properly label any non-textual elements in your
paper. If you are not sure, look up the term in a dictionary.

Data analysis
Specify the procedures you will use, and label them accurately (e.g., ANOVA, MANCOVA, HLM,
ethnography, case study, grounded theory). Communicate your precise intentions and reasons for
choosing specific tools. This helps you and the reader evaluate the choices you made and procedures
you followed.
Provide a well thought-out rationale for your decision to use the design, methodology, and analyses
you have selected.
Data presentation and display
For Vector Graphics (high resolution graphics)
Software:
QtiPlot (free), a clone of OriginLab (used for example in Pharma)
GIMP (free) an alternative of Adobe Photoshop
FIJI ImageJ
InkScape (free), a clone of Adobe Illustrator, CorelDraw
2.3.13 Discussion
The discussion section should include the following:
I. Reiterate the Research Problem/State the Major Findings
Briefly reiterate for your readers the research problem or problems you are investigating and the
methods you used to investigate them, then move quickly to describe the major findings of the
study. You should write a direct, declarative, and succinct proclamation of the study results.
II. Explain the Meaning of the Findings and Why They are Important
No one has thought as long and hard about your study as you have. Systematically explain the
meaning of the findings and why you believe they are important. After reading the discussion
section, you want the reader to think about the results *“why hadn’t I thought of that?”+. You don’t
want to force the reader to go through the paper multiple times to figure out what it all means.
Begin this part of the section by repeating what you consider to be your most important finding first.
III. Relate the Findings to Similar Studies
No study is so novel or possesses such a restricted focus that it has absolutely no relation to other
previously published research. The discussion section should relate your study findings to those of
other studies, particularly if questions raised by previous studies served as the motivation for your
study, the findings of other studies support your findings [which strengthens the importance of your
study results], and/or they point out how your study differs from other similar studies.
IV. Consider Alternative Explanations of the Findings
It is important to remember that the purpose of research is to discover and not to prove. When
writing the discussion section, you should carefully consider all possible explanations for the study
results, rather than just those that fit your prior assumptions or biases.
V. Acknowledge the Study’s Limitations
It is far better for you to identify and acknowledge your study’s limitations than to have them
pointed out by your professor! Describe the generalizability of your results to other situations, if
applicable to the method chosen, then describe in detail problems you encountered in the
method(s) you used to gather information. Note any unanswered questions or issues your study did
not address, and....
VI. Make Suggestions for Further Research
Although your study may offer important insights about the research problem, other questions
related to the problem likely remain unanswered. Moreover, some unanswered questions may have
become more focused because of your study. You should make suggestions for further research in
the discussion section.
NOTE: Besides the literature review section, the majority of references to sources in your research
paper are usually found in the discussion section. A few historical references may be helpful for
perspective but most of the references should be relatively recent and included to aid in the
interpretation of your results and/or linked to similar studies. If a study that you cited disagrees with
your findings, don't ignore it--clearly explain why the study's findings differ from yours.
Problems to Avoid
 Do not waste entire sentences restating your results
 Do not introduce new results in the discussion
 Use of the first person is acceptable, but too much use of the first person may actually
distract the reader from the main points.
NB: You can arrange your Discussion section materials according to your specific objectives. But
these should be followed by a section that covers a recapitulation of the reasons for the study, the
key finding and its justification and introduces the rest of the section.
2.3.14 Conclusions
Group the points in your conclusions according to your specific objectives and number likewise.
The conclusion should begin from the main research question that your thesis or dissertation aimed
to address. This is your final chance to show that you’ve done what you set out to do, so make sure
to formulate a clear, concise answer.
Don’t repeat a list of all the results that you already discussed, but synthesize them into final
takeaway statements that the reader will remember.

Presentation of Research Findings in Defences and Scientific Events
Tips for Making Effective PowerPoint Presentations
Adapted from: https://www.ncsl.org/legislators-staff/legislative-staff/legislative-staff-coordinatingcommittee/tips-for-making-effective-powerpoint-presentations.aspx Retrieved January 8, 2022.
Slideshows are quick to produce, easy to update and an effective way to inject visual interest into
almost any presentation.
However, slideshows can also spell disaster even for experienced presenters. The key to success is to
make certain your slideshow is a visual aid and not a visual distraction.
Tips for Making Effective PowerPoint Presentations
 Use the slide master feature to create a consistent and simple design template. It is fine to
vary the content presentation (bulleted list, two-column text, text and image, etc.), but be
consistent with other elements such as font, colors and background.
 Limit your slides to about five lines of text each
 Aim for a minimum of 24-40 point font size
 Simplify and limit the number of words on each screen. Use key phrases and include only
essential information.
 Limit punctuation and avoid putting words in all-capital letters. Empty space on the slide will
enhance readability.
 Use contrasting colors for text and background. Light text on a dark background is best.
Patterned backgrounds can reduce readability.
 Avoid the use of flashy transitions such as text fly-ins. These features may seem impressive
at first but are distracting and get old quickly.
 Overuse of special effects such as animation and sounds may make your presentation
“cutesy” and could negatively affect your credibility.
 Use good-quality images that reinforce and complement your message. Ensure that your
image maintains its impact and resolution when projected on a larger screen.
 Limit the speed of changing slides. Presenters who constantly “flip” to the next slide are
likely to lose their audience. A good rule of thumb is one slide per minute.
 If possible, view your slides on the screen you’ll be using for your presentation. Make sure
the slides are readable from the back row seats. Text and graphic images should be large
enough to read but not so large as to appear “loud.”
 Have a Plan B in the event of technical difficulties. Remember that transparencies and
handouts will not show animation or other special effects.
 Practice with someone who has never seen your presentation. Ask them for honest feedback
about colors, content and any effects or graphic images you’ve included.
 Do not read too much from your slides. The content of your slides is for the audience, not
for the presenter.
 Do not speak to your slides. Many presenters face their presentation onscreen rather than
their audience.
 Do not apologize for anything in your presentation. If you believe something will be hard to
read or understand, don’t use it.
The Seven Deadly Sins of PowerPoint Presentations
The key to success is to make certain your slide show is a visual aid and not a visual distraction. For
the best results, avoid these common “seven deadly sins” of PowerPoint presentations.
1. Slide Transitions and Sound Effects: Transitions and sound effects can become the focus of
attention, which in turn distracts the audience. Worse yet, when a presentation containing
several effects and transitions runs on a computer much slower than the one on which it
was created, the result is a sluggish, almost comical when viewed. Such gimmicks rarely
enhance the message you’re trying to communicate. Unless you are presenting at a science
fiction convention, leave out the laser-guided text! Leave the fade-ins, fade-outs, wipes,
blinds, dissolves, checkerboards, cuts, covers and splits to Hollywood filmmakers.
2. Standard Clipart: Death to screen beans! PowerPoint© is now so widely used the clipart
included with it has become a “visual cliché.” It shows a lack of creativity and a tired
adherence to a standard form. First, make certain that you need graphical images to
enhance your message. If you do, use your own scanned photographs or better-quality
graphics from companies such as PhotoDisc (www.photodisc.com) or Hemera’s Photo
Objects (www.hemera.com). Screen captures can add realism when presenting information
about a Website or computer program.
3. Presentation Templates: Another visual cliché. Templates force you to fit your original ideas
into someone else’s pre-packaged mold. The templates often contain distracting
backgrounds and poor color combinations. Select a good book on Web graphics and apply
the same principles to your slides. Create your own distinctive look or use your company
logo in a corner of the screen.
4. Text-Heavy Slides: Projected slides are a good medium for depicting an idea graphically or
providing an overview. Slides are a poor medium for detail and reading. Avoid paragraphs,
quotations and even complete sentences. Limit your slides to about five lines of text each
and use words and phrases to make your points. The audience will be able to digest and
retain key points more easily. Don’t use your slides as speaker’s notes or to simply project an
outline of your presentation.
5. The “Me” Paradigm: Presenters often scan a table or graphical image directly from their
existing print corporate material and include it in their slide show presentations. The results
are almost always sub-optimal. Print visuals are usually meant to be seen from 8-12 inches
rather than viewed from several feet. Typically, these images are too small, too detailed and
too textual for an effective visual presentation. The same is true for font size; 12 point font is
adequate when the text is in front of you. In a slideshow, aim for a minimum of 24-40 point
font size. Remember the audience and move the circle from “me” to “we.” Make certain all
elements of any particular slide are large enough to be seen easily. Size really does matter.
6. Reading: A verbal presentation should focus on interactive speaking and listening, not
reading by the speaker or the audience. The demands of spoken and written language differ
significantly. Spoken language is shorter, less formal and more direct. Reading text ruins a
presentation. A related point has to do with handouts for the audience. One of your goals as
a presenter is to capture and hold the audience’s attention. If you distribute materials
before your presentation, your audience will be reading the handouts rather than listening
to you. Often, parts of an effective presentation depend on creating suspense to engage the
audience. If the audience can read everything you’re going to say, that element is lost.
7. Faith in Technology: You never know when an equipment malfunction or incompatible
interfaces will force you to give your presentation on another computer. Be prepared by
having a back-up of your presentation on a CD-ROM. Better yet is a compact-flash memory
card with an adapter for the PCMCIA slot in your notebook. With it, you can still make lastminute changes. It’s also a good idea to prepare a few color transparencies of your key
slides. In the worst-case scenario, none of the technology works and you have no visuals to
present. You should still be able to give an excellent presentation if you focus on the
message. Always familiarize yourself with the presentation, practice it and be ready to
engage the audience regardless of the technology that is available. It’s almost a lost art.
Tips for Effective PowerPoint Presentations
Fonts
 Select a single sans-serif fonts such as Arial or Helvetica. Avoid serif fonts such as Times New
Roman or Palatino because these fonts are sometimes more difficult to read.
 Use no font size smaller than 24 point.
 Use the same font for all your headlines.
 Select a font for body copy and another for headlines.
 Use bold and different sizes of those fonts for captions and subheadings.
 Add a fourth font for page numbers or as a secondary body font for sidebars.
 Don’t use more than four fonts in any one publication.
 Clearly label each screen. Use a larger font (35-45 points) or different color for the title.
 Use larger fonts to indicate importance.
 Use different colors, sizes and styles (e.g., bold) for impact.
 Avoid italicized fonts as these are difficult to read quickly.
 Avoid long sentences.
 Limit punctuation marks.
 No more than 6-8 words per line
 For bullet points, use the 6 x 6 Rule. One thought per line with no more than 6 words per
line and no more than 6 lines per slide
 Use dark text on light background or light text on dark background. However, dark
backgrounds sometimes make it difficult for some people to read the text.
 Do not use all caps except for titles.
 Put repeating elements (like page numbers) in the same location on each page of a multipage document.
 To test the font, stand six feet from the monitor and see if you can read the slide.
Design and Graphical Images
 Use design templates.
 Standardize position, colors, and styles.
 Include only necessary information.
 Limit the information to essentials.
 Content should be self-evident
 Use colors that contrast and compliment.
 Too may slides can lose your audience.
 Keep the background consistent and subtle.
 Limit the number of transitions used. It is often better to use only one so the audience
knows what to expect.
 Use a single style of dingbat for bullets throughout the page.
 Use the same graphical rule at the top of all pages in a multi-page document.
 Use one or two large images rather than several small images.
 Prioritize images instead of a barrage of images for competing attention.
 Make images all the same size.
 Use the same border.
 Arrange images vertically or horizontally.
 Use only enough text when using charts or graphical images to explain the chart or graph
and clearly label the image.
 Keep the design clean and uncluttered. Leave empty space around the text and graphical
images.
 Use quality clipart and use it sparingly. A graphical image should relate to and enhance the
topic of the slide.
 Try to use the same style graphical image throughout the presentation (e.g., cartoon,
photographs)
 Limit the number of graphical images on each slide.
 Repetition of an image reinforces the message. Tie the number of copies of an image to the
numbers in your text.
 Resize, recolor, reverse to turn one image into many. Use duplicates of varying sizes, colors,
and orientations to multiply the usefulness of a single clip art image.
 Make a single image stand out with dramatic contrast. Use color to make a dramatic change
to a single copy of your clip art.
 Check all images on a projection screen before the actual presentation.
 Avoid flashy images and noisy animation effects unless it relates directly to the slide.
Color
 Limit the number of colors on a single screen.
 Bright colors make small objects and thin lines stand out. However, some vibrant colors are
difficult to read when projected.
 Use no more than four colors on one chart.
 Check all colors on a projection screen before the actual presentation. Colors may project
differently than what appears on the monitor.
General Presentation
 Plan carefully.
 Do your research.
 Know your audience.
 Time your presentation by practicing with it several times.
 Speak comfortably and clearly.
 It is normal to fear, shiver, stammer and sweat. However, always remember to stay
focused on passing on the message clearly.
 Check the spelling and grammar.
 Do not read the presentation. Practice the presentation so you can speak from bullet points.
The text should be a cue for the presenter rather than a message for the viewer.
 Give a brief overview at the start. Then present the information. Finally review important
points.
 It is often more effective to have bulleted points appear one at a time so the audience
listens to the presenter rather than reading the screen.
 Use a wireless mouse or pick up the wired mouse so you can move around as you speak.
 If the content is complex, print the slides so the audience can take notes.
 Do not turn your back on the audience. Try to position the monitor so you can speak from
it.
